David Schaich (he): Okay, now that I think I've got everything loaded,
David Schaich (he): we can get underway with the tutorial for this week,
David Schaich (he): on the 20th of April.
And a
David Schaich (he): magic number that is
David Schaich (he): 6, 6, 9, 0, 6, 7.
David Schaich (he): The first thing to do, well the first thing to do is to fix the quality of that projector as best I can by hand.  We'll be zooming out in just a minute to look at some
David Schaich (he): prettier pictures. While that tries to focus itself, I'll check to see if you have it any questions about
David Schaich (he): what we've been doing since resuming, the homework that's due in a couple of weeks, or any other aspect of
David Schaich (he): the module.
David Schaich (he): While you I think about that, I'll just say the plan for today is to quickly flash a couple of addenda to what we were discussing --- some things that came up
David Schaich (he): on Monday. I understand.
David Schaich (he): so something that
David Schaich (he): there is also something familiar with My!
David Schaich (he): We also elaborate on
David Schaich (he): wait. This part matter.
David Schaich (he): We use an imprint in the cosmic microwave. We looked at it on Monday, and then the
David Schaich (he): is yeah.
David Schaich (he): He has to be for solids in particular.
David Schaich (he): proposed by
David Schaich (he): Einstein and I. This report next. If we get to this.
David Schaich (he): hey. what collaboration also
David Schaich (he): on my side, and then to the 7 device. Several years after that.
David Schaich (he): with your last call for
David Schaich (he): questions, and i'll switch over to what I was
David Schaich (he): just loading in canvas. She is. It's a bit of visualization about the photon polarization that came up
David Schaich (he): the lecture on Monday. So i'll zoom in all the way to just get one of these animations on the screen at once. So I mentioned. You may already have
David Schaich (he): seen from previous work that
David Schaich (he): photons are related to electromagnetic fields.
David Schaich (he): and particularly set of differential equations that cover the behavior of electromagnetic fields. Maxwell's equations
David Schaich (he): produce a relation between relations between the electric and magnetic parts of those fields. Our show here in red and blue
David Schaich (he): electric field oscillating
David Schaich (he): up and down along the Z. Axis
David Schaich (he): magnetic field oscillating left and right along the let's label the X-axis here. and
David Schaich (he): if we look at a particular point in the third axis, why.
David Schaich (he): we see, as time goes on. those electric field oscillations passing with the speed of light.
David Schaich (he): and they time between peaks related to the wavelength of that wave lambda.
David Schaich (he): So that is how waves are coming into the quantization of this behavior.
David Schaich (he): but the
David Schaich (he): polarization that led to a doubling of all the degeneracies of the energy walls or photons
David Schaich (he): to the 2 ways that these electromagnetic fields can be arranged if they are still propagating in this direction, and visible with the same speed and wavelength to some observers sitting at a point on why.
David Schaich (he): So I mentioned. We have here the electric feeling the way up and down. Maybe it feel going left and right.
David Schaich (he): and also rotate that by 90 degrees, and the electric field, going left and right like the
David Schaich (he): blue colors here all the magnetic field that goes up and down. and that is an orthogonal linear combination of this electromagnetic wage that are propagating
David Schaich (he): in time.
David Schaich (he): That together account for those 2 polarizations.
David Schaich (he): What we can also do, and, what is more commonly done, is consider super positions of
David Schaich (he): those 2 simple linear organizations up down, electric field versus left, right. electric field. And in particular it is time goes on. We adjust
David Schaich (he): the superposition that we have.
David Schaich (he): So the vector that's pointing here and going around in a circle
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): the choice that we can make of a superposition between vertically oriented electric fields
David Schaich (he): and horizontally oriented electric fields.
David Schaich (he): which is changing as time passes and produces a
David Schaich (he): different sort of pattern. But still, along where there are 2 distinct possibilities.
David Schaich (he): Yeah, either. Well.
David Schaich (he): the picture is worth a 1,000 words. Here you can see that the arrows are rotating in opposite directions on each of these 2 figures
David Schaich (he): that account for those 2 different
David Schaich (he): linear combinations
David Schaich (he): up the over.
It's all right.
David Schaich (he): Circular.
David Schaich (he): 2 of states that we have.
David Schaich (he): That's the right handed over.
David Schaich (he): Yes. it is. It's called the right hand Rule. where. if our figures in that out, the direction in which that there is negotiating.
David Schaich (he): that's one. Why, access to this label. That's the right hand organization.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. Ocean of the hotel
David Schaich (he): on your right hand, and we do the same with the
David Schaich (he): like that.
David Schaich (he): We also get that same direction from
David Schaich (he): rotation. So those are
David Schaich (he): some illustrations or visualizations of
David Schaich (he): the polarization States that contributed an overall factor of 2 to everything we were doing with the
David Schaich (he): at least
David Schaich (he): a factor of 2 to his grand canonical potential, and so cancelling out in the equation of state. but elaborating on that kind of background, if it's something you
David Schaich (he): haven't seen previously, and, as I said in those are
David Schaich (he): linked from the canvas page, and
David Schaich (he): the Wikipedia article. Mathematics. Behind those pictures is also
David Schaich (he): link to the
David Schaich (he): perhaps they are.
David Schaich (he): or less familiar
David Schaich (he): connection to the first time. Yeah. So we looked at on Monday came in connection to this picture of temperature fluctuations in cosmic microwave background
David Schaich (he): that I fly actually red areas on this map of the sky, and our
David Schaich (he): roughly 2 Villa Kelvins more than the blue areas.
David Schaich (he): the overall average temperature being about 2.7 kelvin. So 273 degrees Celsius below 0, and by it we have a few claims about this. There.
David Schaich (he): I hear you seem to be serious about further context.
David Schaich (he): First of all, they this pattern to
David Schaich (he): the big bank of the after global.
David Schaich (he): the origin of the universe 14
David Schaich (he): 1 billionyears ago. This is
David Schaich (he): a another, a static visualization in this case. So
David Schaich (he): the evolution of the universe over those 14 billionyears which actually takes this picture of the Cm.
David Schaich (he): They will be after little light pattern coming from 375,000 years after the big bag. the very earliest point of the universe. And
David Schaich (he): what makes so 375,000 years after reality
14 billionis still 14 billion
David Schaich (he): hey? You
David Schaich (he): like. As we look back at further and further distances from where we are sitting. we are looking at light that has been traveling to us for longer and longer, eventually getting out
that 14 billion
David Schaich (he): light years away. And what is
David Schaich (he): remarkable about this copy of my great background
David Schaich (he): is that at earlier times, that first 375,000 years of the universe's existence. It was actually opaque is that high temperature plasma.
David Schaich (he): where electrons, protons, and neutrons were
David Schaich (he): all
David Schaich (he): 3 particles passing off of each other. and now I would like to pass between them.
David Schaich (he): And this only adds the information
David Schaich (he): of this colleague microwave background that neutral atoms form and allow it to start traveling long distances, and eventually 14 billionlight years
David Schaich (he): to our detectors.
David Schaich (he): So this cause my my early background is
David Schaich (he): essentially the earliest point in time that can possibly be seen using what
David Schaich (he): gravitational waves
David Schaich (he): can in principle see earlier times. They're at trickier as you work with than like.
David Schaich (he): And
the point I made about
David Schaich (he): the patterns of fluctuations in
David Schaich (he): this now college. the temperature of that Cmb. What is that?
David Schaich (he): The precise distribution of light and dark.
David Schaich (he): and this plot is related to what's the Not only is existence, but also it's
David Schaich (he): concentration, the amount of dark matter in the universe
David Schaich (he): that wouldn't go through
David Schaich (he): all to the more conceptual
David Schaich (he): picture of what is going on is looking at what's called a power spectrum. So it the correlations between
David Schaich (he): areas on this problem whether their temperature is fluctuating up or down. depending on the distance scale
David Schaich (he): between those points. So a distance on the cell that maps. The light sky onto a flat surface is an angle between 2.
David Schaich (he): So if you fix that angle, say 4.5 degrees, and look at all of the points that are separated by after the
David Schaich (he): the whole sky.
David Schaich (he): We get some
David Schaich (he): correlation function. See
David Schaich (he): as well.
David Schaich (he): is given my data points here from a succession of
David Schaich (he): with balloon and satellite experiments, the most recent one here is this.
David Schaich (he): a similar experiment that we have
David Schaich (he): not quite 20 years ago in 2,006. But there is a a clear pattern to the data that's coming out. A succession of
David Schaich (he): peaks in
David Schaich (he): the correlation between the temperature fluctuations separated by
David Schaich (he): different angular scales, different distances. the projected out onto this plane.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the mathematical calculation that we're not going to do, because this is not a cosmology module.
David Schaich (he): The term is the functional form. I would. How these data should behave
David Schaich (he): just shows this red band on the wall of the very panel gray line as a fit to a function with 6 3 parameters.
David Schaich (he): where those parameters are things like the total amount of matter in the universe
David Schaich (he): which controls things like the height of this very first. the scale of one degree angular separation.
David Schaich (he): Another parameter that comes in is the relative amount of dark matter
David Schaich (he): compared to order that actually interacts with
David Schaich (he): what we are looking at in this.
David Schaich (he): hey?
David Schaich (he): I should have said that the horizontal axis here is plotting the same thing in 2 different ways, this angular scale, and you related to Hey, you multiple expansion there.
David Schaich (he): probably familiar with the first couple of and then higher and higher. smaller and smaller
separations.
David Schaich (he): most of that
David Schaich (he): with that out of the way. And this third peak here
David Schaich (he): that it is sensitive to upon this
David Schaich (he): a direct matter compared to ordinary matter that interacts with what?
David Schaich (he): And just to
David Schaich (he): for the final
David Schaich (he): elaboration on Monday's lecture.
David Schaich (he): This is a
David Schaich (he): slightly later on to you from
David Schaich (he): 15 years ago, in 2,009,
David Schaich (he): and it's pl that same thing. that same access to multi whole moments, some angular separation
David Schaich (he): compared to that power spectrum with slightly different ranges of those axes.
David Schaich (he): What is
David Schaich (he): the reason I've gone with such old plots
David Schaich (he): is that this one
David Schaich (he): that's the interesting comparison that
David Schaich (he): it's kind of hold on the passion of this it fits. That calls me my way back from data from that the 2 different fit forms.
David Schaich (he): So it's a solid black line, and they
David Schaich (he): that are essentially indistinguishable at that first.
David Schaich (he): But you can see at that
David Schaich (he): obviously data points much better. Yeah, they you.
David Schaich (he): So the top of same
David Schaich (he): analysis that we were looking at before this earlier plot
David Schaich (he): what's called the
David Schaich (he): model of the Universe, which assumes
David Schaich (he): that there is some amount of dark matter, and the told about that there is is determined by the height of that through a peak.
David Schaich (he): The black Wall
David Schaich (he): is an alternative hypothesis that was
David Schaich (he): proposed
David Schaich (he): for some years that there actually isn't any dark matter. Gravity just works differently at very large scales.
David Schaich (he): fractions of the entire universe. That
okay
David Schaich (he): checked out in the
David Schaich (he): it's modified correctly
David Schaich (he): which it's. Basically We it out
David Schaich (he): 15 years ago by these sorts of analyses.
David Schaich (he): i'm looking at temperature relying on.
David Schaich (he): they're playing a spectrum for
David Schaich (he): the photon gas that we have going through. This
David Schaich (he): is there? That's all I have to say about those
David Schaich (he): conductions between what we've been doing and
David Schaich (he): oh, that's more recent 20 first century research
David Schaich (he): there any questions about that before we return to
David Schaich (he): talking about the Einstein solid and and heat capacities of materials.
David Schaich (he): So.
David Schaich (he): getting back into this, this tutorial activity?
David Schaich (he): Is this something we
David Schaich (he): briefly touched on
David Schaich (he): before the break. talking about this picture of
David Schaich (he): So see Capacity that we actually flashed in. The very first lecture is
David Schaich (he): something that we will be able to
David Schaich (he): analyze based on
David Schaich (he): Do it. I don't know.
David Schaich (he): I recall correctly essentially all that
David Schaich (he): we had time to touch on that last.
David Schaich (he): The term break was.
David Schaich (he): I'm sending you the task
David Schaich (he): of
David Schaich (he): I can hear you these experimental heat capacities
David Schaich (he): to what the prediction we would get just from. And
David Schaich (he): nonetheless it is.
David Schaich (he): And I can't remember if I and that copies of that to
David Schaich (he): I heard you. It's a wall
David Schaich (he): that is
Alright.
David Schaich (he): all in Canada as usual. that way. You don't have to
David Schaich (he): a lot of screens here.
David Schaich (he): See what's going on.
David Schaich (he): bye. because this activity has been on canvas, for
David Schaich (he): they are her rules. Now
David Schaich (he): you may well have spent some time during the break looking at that side which introduces hey here
David Schaich (he): better way of analyzing solid materials
David Schaich (he): compared to it's just the simple spin system I talked about. and
David Schaich (he): several aspects graduate's module. It actually comes up again the home of assignments.
David Schaich (he): So I will make the assumption that you may all have check that out to you. But haven't that worked at
David Schaich (he): so I think the
David Schaich (he): model is something that we can
David Schaich (he): talk about and work through, or
David Schaich (he): the rest of today.
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): you can just jump straight to the
David Schaich (he): result, for that's been a system to see why and how it does not work.
David Schaich (he): I've assumed that. Go through the calculation yourself, and
David Schaich (he): we call it here
David Schaich (he): heat, capacity at constant volume. It says derivative of the internal energy
David Schaich (he): with respect to the temperature.
David Schaich (he): Yours What that you know here that the lines on here are that
David Schaich (he): the experimental measurement interaction, the heat, capacity measured, and it constant pressure, which is easier to do
David Schaich (he): experimentally further to do analysis. So we will
David Schaich (he): this treat those 2 types of people that these as equivalent.
David Schaich (he): So that is part of the reason for the the
David Schaich (he): lines up here. But the calling the definition of that you can passively.
and
David Schaich (he): i'll quickly check. That's It's like the yeah average internal energy All 3 have It's what it costs to.
David Schaich (he): We have in.
David Schaich (he): She's obviously not what
David Schaich (he): is being measured experimentally.
David Schaich (he): and the it's been
David Schaich (he): okay. So
David Schaich (he): yeah.
David Schaich (he): energy given my I of all the tangent that we derived
David Schaich (he): me
David Schaich (he): derivative of that you probably worked out
David Schaich (he): is
David Schaich (he): just derivative of that, with all the tangent is the
David Schaich (he): inverse hyperbolic code tangent squared.
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): there are a few aspects of this that are better. I think capacity. Both of these cases actually is not negative.
David Schaich (he): is the basic requirement that we have for it related to that fluctuation, dissipation, relation, the first on our assignment. The c. Capacity is equivalent to a
David Schaich (he): Us. Expectation value of it.
David Schaich (he): no bigger number fluctuations around it. you
David Schaich (he): and
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): low temperature
David Schaich (he): infinity, so as
David Schaich (he): always a starting point for understanding the
David Schaich (he): functions of temperature is to look at the high, low temperature with us. Yeah.
David Schaich (he): cosine is e to the x plus the minus X, so that
David Schaich (he): becomes approximately
David Schaich (he): square.
David Schaich (he): A large number is enhanced contribution. This is also calling
David Schaich (he): to infinity now exponentially
David Schaich (he): practice, you know, to 0 exponentially quickly. and the temperatures, which is at least
David Schaich (he): relatively consistent with the data that you see dropping down to
David Schaich (he): 0. And i'm sure it gets below 50 to 100
you're looking at.
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): that you say check, mark in. I'll save
David Schaich (he): the heat capacity for any. I think we do.
The plasma
David Schaich (he): does
David Schaich (he): essentially always go to 0 in the low time as your limit. This is
David Schaich (he): related to the entry for you. Yes. he is. Sometimes, You see. there is a lot of thermodynamics
David Schaich (he): some of the same way that the entropy always increases
David Schaich (he): always.
David Schaich (he): so that so far it seems so good
David Schaich (he): modeling salads as spins.
David Schaich (he): but
David Schaich (he): high temperatures
it goes to
David Schaich (he): 0. The hyperbolic
David Schaich (he): goes to one.
David Schaich (he): and we have
David Schaich (he): Beta square over. Essentially well.
David Schaich (he): 1, 2, 0 quadratically in that inverse temperature
David Schaich (he): which is not.
David Schaich (he): I think, behavior, guys. you want to. We produce
David Schaich (he): So, hopping over to
David Schaich (he): notebook that I had set up just before we got started.
David Schaich (he): we can take a look at
David Schaich (he): the full behavior of that
David Schaich (he): Alpha Beta H. Squared over the coast, Hyperbolic cosine squared the age dividing by but the heat capacity by end to
David Schaich (he): get rid of that
David Schaich (he): variable. So the full function in terms of Beta H. It's just like we analyze in the high in the temperature limits going to 0. In both cases a low temperature is a large Beta H.
David Schaich (he): That is the exponential approach to 0. High temperature is a small mid h. That's the quadratic approach to 0, and maybe more convenient for comparison with
David Schaich (he): these data plotted against T rather than beta.
David Schaich (he): just to switch all the X's to
David Schaich (he): one over X's in that expression
David Schaich (he): and plot things as a function of temperature rather than inverse temperature. So the exponentially
David Schaich (he): quickly crashing down to 0 at low temperatures.
David Schaich (he): but then not approaching
David Schaich (he): the roughly constant value that we want to monotonic increase as those. Now. what is that
David Schaich (he): falling back down to 0 at high temperatures?
David Schaich (he): So
David Schaich (he): that was. Take away your problem. We looked at before the break. And now
David Schaich (he): the
David Schaich (he): improvement on this is so.
David Schaich (he): This is a new problem. I'll read it
David Schaich (he): 20 years ago, and I this miracle of your proposed that energy was qualified to explain. It's called the total electric effect.
David Schaich (he): Yeah. A couple of years after that
David Schaich (he): you can apply that same idea of.
David Schaich (he): Still, with that
David Schaich (he): have to introduce the
David Schaich (he): idea that the particles making up, and so they are interacting with each other, which makes all of the
David Schaich (he): calculations much more complicated than Zoom will see here
here
David Schaich (he): a few weeks.
David Schaich (he): So the I science approach I mean picture that
David Schaich (he): the all right. fixed in place by interacting
David Schaich (he): with their neighbors.
David Schaich (he): because those interactions are hard to analyze
David Schaich (he): mathematically.
David Schaich (he): Instead of
David Schaich (he): this, interaction
David Schaich (he): leads to the energy of the solid
David Schaich (he): can be identified with
David Schaich (he): so called oscillators
David Schaich (he): that we're connecting the ads rather than they have themselves. So
David Schaich (he): this is the picture they have in the
David Schaich (he): for you
David Schaich (he): shaded circles on the atoms and assembly. They're connected by these. Yes.
David Schaich (he): and each other is connected to some number of it's, neighbors by these oscillators in a regular pattern. This is a
David Schaich (he): 2 dimensional square lattice. I,
David Schaich (he): the simplest possible model of this
David Schaich (he): quantized energy levels
David Schaich (he): the oscillators.
David Schaich (he): which could have
David Schaich (he): 2 units, and
David Schaich (he): so on to arbitrarily high energies just ending on
David Schaich (he): how fully those oscillators are heading to
David Schaich (he): your location in this all?
David Schaich (he): So okay.
David Schaich (he): micro economical approach. yeah to where we started with this module.
David Schaich (he): we can
David Schaich (he): suppose we are working with a solid, a fixed number of oscillators. That's
David Schaich (he): number of adults which share
David Schaich (he): some fixed amount of energy that comes with more of
David Schaich (he): Hey
David Schaich (he): you this
David Schaich (he): there it is, K. It's just the
David Schaich (he): some of the energy in each of those and oscillators
David Schaich (he): which itself is
David Schaich (he): it shouldn't
David Schaich (he): energy? Here.
David Schaich (he): K. Is some of the number of energy that's the energy itself.
David Schaich (he): It is
David Schaich (he): some over all the oscillators in K times
David Schaich (he): that.
David Schaich (he): So if we want to find the heat capacity for the small
David Schaich (he): ensemble. there are a few steps to go through first. My name I for sure
David Schaich (he): related to
one of them
David Schaich (he): of the number of microstates for and oscillators with K.
David Schaich (he): Then we invert that to find
David Schaich (he): yeah as a
for the
David Schaich (he): and then, finally. hey to you? Can we have it
David Schaich (he): to get the heat capacity? So
David Schaich (he): that is the task that's laid out in all the
David Schaich (he): that first results will give you some time to work on that
David Schaich (he): check in with
the first point at the end of today
David Schaich (he): getting that total number of microstates, and
David Schaich (he): that these into the infrastructure
David Schaich (he): you can check, I guess.
David Schaich (he): the simplest possible setup. It is not trivial
David Schaich (he): with just 3 oscillators
David Schaich (he): that are connected 3 atoms and sharing some small amounts of energy
David Schaich (he): 0 1 2, or 3 units divided above those 3 oscillators possible ways.
David Schaich (he): How many questions about
David Schaich (he): the picture of the solid, or
David Schaich (he): how to
David Schaich (he): approach the determination of the capacity.
David Schaich (he): you know.
David Schaich (he): Recording it lets you. you know, with some of these calculations yourselves.
David Schaich (he): maybe yeah.
David Schaich (he): 3.2. Check anybody. Somebody first steps.
David Schaich (he): That
David Schaich (he): easy thing to look at is just that
David Schaich (he): minimal case of
David Schaich (he): n equals 3
David Schaich (he): oscillators with
David Schaich (he): some total number of energy. Us. So if we have no energy at all in the system, then there's an area simple counting of microstates.
David Schaich (he): One of the 3 oscillators has any units of energy.
David Schaich (he): Contrast that with energy it couldn't be in
David Schaich (he): any one of those 3 oscillators, each of those situations to files the different microstates
David Schaich (he): like this, the energy that oscillator or the third oscillator.
David Schaich (he): This is actually the same that we we had for
David Schaich (he): just a
David Schaich (he): set of.
David Schaich (he): I just fixed a lot of energy. So so far. Okay, I just It's been system that things become more interesting when there are 2
David Schaich (he): is that there are 2 ways we can to find those up among different oscillators. In contrast to the spin system. where at some point it starts.
David Schaich (he): i'm buying out of here. Each of these oscillators can now have 0. One or 2 units. There are 3 ways to have
David Schaich (he): the total amount of energy in each one of those 3 operators.
David Schaich (he): and there are also a few ways to split the 2 units of energy among different oscillators. So say you have 1 min there.
there, you there!
David Schaich (he): Oh, well. 0 1
David Schaich (he): or 0 1.
Well
David Schaich (he): so
David Schaich (he): toll over viruses. There is now 6.
David Schaich (he): You're getting it so interesting
David Schaich (he): behavior that was not possible.
David Schaich (he): It's been system. We started off with even more. So for
David Schaich (he): 3 years better. Here we have that same 3 ways of having all 3 min in a single oscillator. You can also stood up into
David Schaich (he): 2 and one oscillator, one in the second oscillator and 0, and the third oscillator. If we count all the possibilities
David Schaich (he): there are.
David Schaich (he): choose any one of the 3 or the 2 units, then we have 2 left to choose for the one that is
David Schaich (he): so, 3 factorial 6. And then finally, we can have 1, one in all 3 oscillators getting a total
10,
David Schaich (he): and I will just give you a target, for
David Schaich (he): there you go.
David Schaich (he): a full expression that you may already have derived or can
David Schaich (he): in for if not.
David Schaich (he): yeah. full expression is.
David Schaich (he): hey plus and minus one factorial. divided by K Factorial.
David Schaich (he): the minus one factorial or
David Schaich (he): one choose K.
And
David Schaich (he): if you got it yes. drive that it gets you something more.
David Schaich (he): I'll create 2 shoot, 4 in the coming week.
David Schaich (he): and if you have difficulties with it. You can go through the derivation next Thursday.
David Schaich (he): and do the usual
David Schaich (he): specific use in a more straightforward way.
David Schaich (he): So the last call for
David Schaich (he): questions about that otherwise we need to
David Schaich (he): play with this. So Einstein
David Schaich (he): probably do something even clever. That device something that
next Thursday.